41. ‘The soul, having once learned to distinguish these four properly, having abandoned all (ideas of) straightness or qu
ickness, attains to the immortal sphere.

42. ‘For this reason the Brâhmans in the world, discoursing on the supreme Brahman, practise here a rigorous course of sa
cred study and let other Brâhmans live with them to follow it also.’

43. The prince, having heard this discourse from the seer, asked concerning the means and the final state.

44. ‘Wilt thou please to explain to me how, how far, and where this life of sacred study is to be led, and the limit of t
his course of life?’

45. Then Arâḍa, according to his doctrine, declared to him in another way that course of life clearly and succinctly.

46. ‘The devotee, in the beginning, having left his house, and assumed the signs of the mendicant, goes on, following a r
ule of conduct which extends to the whole life.

47. ‘Cultivating absolute content with any alms from any person, he carries out his lonely life, indifferent to all feeli
ngs, meditating on the holy books, and satisfied in himself.

48. ‘Then having seen how fear arises from passion and the highest happiness from the absence of passion, he strives, by 
restraining all the senses, to attain to tranquillity of mind.

49. ‘Then he reaches the first stage of contemplation, which is separated from desires, evil intentions and the like, and
arises from discrimination and which involves reasoning.

50. ‘And having obtained this ecstatic contemplation, and reasoning on various objects, the childish mind is carried away
by the possession of the new unknown ecstasy.

51. ‘With a tranquillity of this kind, which disdains desire or dislike, he reaches the world of Brahman, deceived by the
delight.

52. ‘But the wise man, knowing that these reasonings bewilder the mind, reaches a (second) stage of contemplation separat
e from this, which has its own pleasure and ecstasy.

53. ‘And he who, carried away by this pleasure, sees no further distinction, obtains a dwelling full of light, even among
st the âbhâsura deities.

54. ‘But he who separates his mind from this pleasure and ecstasy, reaches the third stage of contemplation ecstatic but 
without pleasure.

55. ‘Upon this stage some teachers make their stand, thinking that it is indeed liberation, since pleasure and pain have 
been left behind and there is no exercise of the intellect.

56. ‘But he who, immersed in this ecstasy, strives not for a further distinction, obtains an ecstasy in common with the S
ubhakritsna deities.

57. ‘But he who, having attained such a bliss desires it not but despises it, obtains the fourth stage of contemplation w
hich is separate from all pleasure or pain.

58. ‘The fruit of this contemplation which is on an equality with the Vrihatphala deities, those who investigate the grea
t wisdom call the Vrihatphala.

59. ‘But rising beyond this contemplation, having seen the imperfections of all embodied souls, the wise man climbs to a 
yet higher wisdom in order to abolish all body.

60. ‘Then, having abandoned this contemplation, being resolved to find a further distinction, he becomes as disgusted wit
h form itself as he who knows the real is with pleasures.

