51. ‘That the nature of the embryo in the womb is produced as composed of hands, feet, belly, back, and head, and that it
is also united with the soul,--the wise declare that all this comes of itself spontaneously.

52. ‘Who causes the sharpness of the thorn? or the various natures of beasts and birds? All this has arisen spontaneously
; there is no acting from desire, how then can there be such a thing as will?

53. ‘Others say that creation comes from äsvara, what need then is there of the effort of the conscious soul? That which 
is the cause of the action of the world, is also determined as the cause of its ceasing to act.

54. ‘Some say that the coming into being and the destruction of being are alike caused by the soul, but they say that com
ing into being arises without effort, while the attainment of liberation is by effort.

55. ‘A man discharges his debt to his ancestors by begetting offspring, to the saints by sacred lore, to the gods by sacr
ifices; he is born with these three debts upon him,--whoever has liberation (from these,) he indeed has liberation.

56. ‘Thus by this series of rules the wise promise liberation to him who uses effort; but however ready for effort with a
ll their energy, those who seek liberation will find weariness.

57. ‘Therefore, gentle youth, if thou hast a love for liberation, follow rightly the prescribed rule; thus wilt thou thys
elf attain to it, and the king’s grief will come to an end.

58. ‘And as for thy meditations on the evils of life ending in thy return from the forest to thy home,--let not the thoug
ht of this trouble thee, my son,--those in old time also have returned from the forests to their houses.

59. ‘The king Ambarîsha, though he had dwelt in the forest, went back to the city, surrounded by his children; so too Râm
a, seeing the earth oppressed by the base, came forth from his hermitage and ruled it again.

60. ‘So too Drumâksha, the king of the Sâlvas, came to his city from the forest with his son; and Sâükriti Antideva, afte
r he had become a Brahmarshi, received his royal dignity from the saint Vasishtha.’

61. ‘Such men as these, illustrious in glory and virtue, left the forests and came back to their houses; therefore it is 
no sin to return from a hermitage to one’s home, if it be only for the sake of duty.’

62. Then having heard the affectionate and loyal words of the minister, who was as the eye of the king,--firm in his reso
lve, the king’s son made his answer, with nothing omitted or displaced, neither tedious nor hasty:

63. ‘This doubt whether anything exists or not, is not to be solved for me by another’s words; having determined the trut
h by asceticism or quietism, I will myself grasp whatever is ascertained concerning it.

64. ‘It is not for me to accept a theory which depends on the unknown and is all controverted, and which involves a hundr
ed prepossessions; what wise man would go by another’s belief? Mankind are like the blind directed in the darkness by th
e blind.

65. ‘But even though I cannot discern the truth, yet still, if good and evil are doubted, let one’s mind be set on the go
od; even a toil in vain is to be chosen by him whose soul is good, while the man of base soul has no joy even in the tru
th.

66. ‘But having seen that this "sacred tradition" is uncertain, know that that only is right which has been uttered by th
e trustworthy; and know that trustworthiness means the absence of faults; he who is without faults will not utter an unt
ruth.

67. ‘And as for what thou saidst to me in regard to my returning to my home, by alleging Râma and others as examples, the
y are no authority,--for in determining duty, how canst thou quote as authorities those who have broken their vows?

68. ‘Even the sun, therefore, may fall to the earth, even the mountain Himavat may lose its firmness; but never would I r
eturn to my home as a man of the world, with no knowledge of the truth and my senses only alert for external objects.

69. ‘I would enter the blazing fire, but not my house with my purpose unfulfilled.’ Thus he proudly made his resolve, and
rising up in accordance with it, full of disinterestedness, went his way.

70. Then the minister and the Brâhman, both full of tears, having heard his firm determination, and having followed him a
while with despondent looks, and overcome with sorrow, slowly returned of necessity to the city.

